# Learning Activity 3.1

#### What is sleep?

Sleep is a naturally occuring ASC often characterised by a loss of conscious awareness.

#### Why is sleep considered to be an altered state of consciousness?

During sleep, your level of awareness is reduced, the intensity of sensations is reduced and thoughts and memory function is changed.

#### What is polysomnography?

Polysomnography is an intensive research method used to study sleep by monitoring and recording various physiological responses. It is often completed in sleep laboratories due to the large amount of equipment needed.

#### Explain what a self-report is and how it may be used to study sleep, with a reference to an specific self-report method

A self-report is the written or spoken response from a participant to questions given by a researcher. For example, a researcher could give participants a questionaire to measure the current characteristics of the individuals sleep or the effect on an IV.

#### Construct a table that summarises the recording devices that may be used in a sleep study. Headings should include Name

| Name of device | What is it? | What does it measure? |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Electroencephalograph (EEG) | | Records brain activity generated by the brain during sleep |
| Electromyograph (EMG) |  | Used to detect, amplify and record the electrical activity of muscles |
| Electro-oculargraph (EOG) | | Measures electrical activity relating to the muscles used to move your eyes |

---

#### Suggest two potential limitations of:
##### Research studies undertaken in a sleep laboratory

In a sleep laboratory. participants may not feel as comfortable or fall asleep as easily.

##### Self-report methods for sleep research

Self-report methods are relatively indirect measurements of sleep patterns. They also usually lack measurement of objective quantitative data.

# Learning Activity 3.2

| Type of sleep | EEG records | EOG records | EMG records | Other physiological responses | Duration |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Awake | Beta waves |
| NREM Stage 1 | Mix of alpha and theta waves | --- | Slow-rolling eye movements | Hypnic jerk, blood pressure and body temperature begin to fall, individuals don't feel like they've been asleep | 5-10 minutes |
| NREM Stage 2 | Mostly theta waves with K-complexes | Slow-rolling eye movements | --- | Sleep spindles, K-complexes, blood pressure and body temperature continue to fall | 10-20 minutes |
| NREM Stage 3 | Mix of theta and delta waves | --- | Little eye movement | More muscle relaxation, much more difficult to wake up, more disoriented upon being woken up, NREM dreams | 10 minutes |
| NREM Stage 4 | More than 50% delta waves | --- | No eye movement | Muscles completely relaxed, no physical movement, if woken up during this stage, it will take 10 minutes to reestablish their surroundings, sleep walking occurs, NREM dreams | 10 minutes early during sleep, but can be skipped closer to the morning |
| REM | Beta-like waves | --- | Increased levels of movement | Blood pressure and heartrate increase, eyes have erratic movement, paradoxical sleep, more aware of surroundings, increased GSR, cataplexy, dreaming is more memorable and vivid | A few minutes early on in sleep up to an hour in later parts of sleep |

#### Briefly describe the pattern and proportions of NREM and REM sleep in a typical night's sleep for an adult

During a normal night's sleep it is expected that 80% of sleep is NREM sleep and 20% of sleep is REM sleep. Although, during the second half of the time spent asleep there is a higher proportion of REM sleep.

#### Why are NREM stages 3 and 4 referred to as slow wave sleep?

During NREM stages 3 and 4, delta waves start to occur. Due to the low frequency of these delta waves, the stages are reffered to as slow wave sleep.

#### Why is REM sleep sometimes referred to as paradoxical sleep?

Traditionally sleep is thought to be a period of low brain activity, but during REM sleep your brain acts like it is fully awake with brain wave patterns similar to those expected in normal waking consciousness.

# Learning Activity 3.3

#### Participant 1

##### Stage of sleep: NREM Stage 2
##### Evidence:

Multiple indicators suggest that the participant was in NREM Stage 2 sleep. The EEG patterns show K-complexes which are characteristic of NREM Stage 2 sleep. Along with medium amplitude medium frequency theta waves that also characteristic of NREM Stage 2 sleep. The participant is observed to be aware of their surroundings while asleep reporting that they heard a smash on the floor of the researchers office, and they report feeling like they were 'just dozing'.

#### Participant 2

##### Stage of sleep: REM Sleep
##### Evidence:

Physiological measures including heartrate and blood pressure show that the participant has a high level of activity. The EEG pattern describes beta-like waves. The EOG pattern shows frequent eye movements, a key characteristic of REM sleep. A key observation recorded is that the participant reported vividly detailed dreams.

#### Participant 3

##### Stage of sleep: NREM Stage 4
##### Evidence:

Physiological signs all report very low levels of activity. The EEG shows high amplitude low frequency delta waves, that most often occur during NREM Stage 4 sleep. Limited eye movement and almost complete muscle relaxation are also associated with Stage 4. The participant was observed to be very difficult to awake, and was seen to be disoriented after being woken. The participant also reports having a limited recall of dreaming.

# Learning Activity 3.5

#### Briefly describe two general trends in the pattern and proportions of NREM and REM sleep across the lifespan.

Both NREM and REM sleep are longest after birth and begin to plateau mid adolescence. REM sleep is longest during infancy and drops off during adolescence. NREM sleep peaks during the largest stage of growth between the ages of 2 to 5 years of age, and remains elevated until the end of puberty. The proportion of REM sleep to NREM sleep tends to stay relatively over adulthood and old age, although total sleep requirement shortens towards old age.

#### Compare and contrast sleep-wake patterns of children, adolescents and adults with reference of two distinguishing features of each lifespan stage.

Adolescents undergo a hormonally induced sleep-wake cycle shift, with their biological clocks moving back by about 1 to 2 hours. As a result of this, adolescents typically find it easier to stay up later but more difficult to wake up in the morning. They require a total of about 9 hours of sleep a night. This is substaintially longer than the 7-8 hours requirement for adults, and shorter than the 8-10 requirement for children.

---

#### Explain the meaning of the term sleep-wake cycle shift

A sleep-wake cycle shift occurs when the bodys biological clock is out of sync with real time

#### Briefly describe the sleep-wake cycle shift that occurs during adolescence

During adolescence, hormonal changes occur that result in melatonin being released later at night than in other stages of development. This leads their biological clock to be able 1-2 hours behind real-time, resulting in them feeling sleepy later than other age groups.

#### What are three potential consequences of this shift?

Adolescents may find it difficult to concerntrate at school as a result of sleep deprivation. They may also be more irritable and more experience drifting off into sleep during the day.

#### To what extent may it be possible to readjust or compensate for this shift? Explain your answer

Engaging in good sleep hygiene trains the body to be closer to real-time and allows adolescence to get off to sleep quicker, resulting in a longer period of sleep. Proposals have been made to also move school start times later in order to compensate for the shifted sleep cycle.

---

#### Explain the meaning of delayed onset of sleep

Delayed onset of sleep is simply a inability to fall asleep at an ideal time whether it be due to hormonal changes, social stimulation or drug use.

#### Explain the meaning of sleep debt

Sleep debt is sleep that has been missed and is now 'owed'.

# Learning Activity 3.6

#### Compare and contrast the typical sleep patterns of young adults and elderly people shown in figure 3.19 on page 145. Ensure that you refer to: sleep onset, REM episodes, NREM stages and 2 episodes, awakenings

- Youth go into deep stages of sleep (NREM Stage 4), whereas elderly don't reach stage 4
- Elderly people wake up much more frequently and for longer periods of time than youth
- REM episodes are shorter at the start of sleep and longer later in sleep for youth, whereas in the elderly REM episodes are mostly the same length
- Elderly usually take longer to fall asleep than youth

#### Suggest a possible limitation of the data

The data doesn't account for the napping that elderly persons often have throughout the day

#### Write a conclusion on the typical sleep pattern of young adults and elderly person based on the data

Young adults typically fall asleep quickly, and tend to reach deeper stages of sleep early on (stage 4 within 30 minutes of falling asleep). They then cycle back up and have a short REM episode. This cycle then continues with less slow wave sleep and longer REM episodes as sleep progresses. They are unlikely to wake up and if they do they will often go right back to sleep.

Elderly persons typically take a long period of time to fall asleep (long sleep onset). Once asleep they tend to stay in lighter stages of sleep for the majority of sleep. They rarely dip down to NREM stage 4, but in the first half of the night are likely to experience some NREM stage 3. REM episodes are all approximately constant in length throughout sleep. Elderly people frequently wake up and find it difficult to fall back asleep.

# Learning Activity 3.9

#### What does the term sleep deprivation refer to?

Sleep deprivation refers to any loss of sleep that an individual has had

#### How are partial and total sleep deprivation defined?

Partial sleep deprivation is defined as not having reached the recommend amount of sleep for the last 24 hrs, whereas total sleep deprivation is defined as being a total lack of sleep within the last 24 hrs.

---

#### Describe three relevant ethical guidelines that psychologists must follow when conducting research on sleep deprivation with human participants

- The no-harm principle states that no permanent harm can arise as a result of the participant participating in the experiment, e.g individuals must not be permanently affected by their sleep deprivation
- Informed consent must be given the participant to ensure that they understand the risks of the experiment, e.g the potential affects of sleep deprivation
- Participants should be permitted to withdrawl from the experiment at any point if they wish to

#### Prepare a table in which you summarise common psychological and physiological effects on people of partial and total sleep deprivation.

| --- | Partial sleep deprivation | Total sleep deprivation |
| Psychological effects (Cognitive) | Slower reaction time than normal | Delusions, hallucinations, difficulty with memory |
| Psychological effects (Affective) | Individuals are more grumpy, irritable | --- |
| Psychological effects (Behavioural) | --- | --- |
| Physiological effects | Difficulty staying awake, sleepiness | Lowered body temperature, microsleep |

# Learning Activity 3.10
Adam, whose job which is typically more mundane and boring, is likely to make more errors as a result of sleep deprivation than Sara. Research has shown that sleep deprivation negatively impacts complex and interesting tasks much less than tasks which and repetitive and boring.

# Learning Activity 3.13

#### Briefly describe the purpose of sleep in terms of restorative theories
The purpose of sleep in terms of restorative theories is to restore depleted energy and acculumated fatigue that occurs while awake.

#### Outline the differing restorative effects of NREM and REM sleep
NREM sleep provides mostly physiological recovery while REM sleep provides mostly psychological recovery.

#### Explain the meaning of REM rebound and why it occurs
REM rebound is the phenomenon characterised by an increase in REM duration in the wake of insufficient amounts of REM sleep. REM rebound occurs to 'catch up' on REM sleep that has been lost from previous nights.

#### Outline empirical research in support of restorative theories
Research conducted on marathon runners showed that when allowed to sleep as long as needed, marathon runners slept on average 90 minutes longer than non-marathon runners. They also tended to stay in deeper sleep for longer, suggesting that an increase need for physiological recovery leads to more slow wave sleep.

---

#### Briefly describe the purpose of sleep in terms of survival theories
The purpose of sleep in terms of survival theories is to reduce activity during times when predators are more likely to attack.

#### Outline empirical research in support of survival theories
Animals with fewer natural predators such as lions and gorillas tend to sleep longer than animals with more predators such as cattle and horses.
